---
title: "Recurse Center Day 1: New Faces and W-Shingling"
date: 2016-09-26
tags: [recurse center]
---

Today was the first day of the Recurse Center. I've understood for a
while that RC is a special place that attracts special people, but
experiencing it firsthand was better than I could have imagined. I met
so many smart, curious, and kind people and I can barely believe I
have the opportunity to be colocated with these folks for three whole
months!

Most of the day was spent socializing or enjoying workshops that the
RC staff and Fall 1 batch members organized, but I did find the chance
to sit down and write some code. I paired for a while with my roommate
Jhilene and eventually finished up a small Python module for
converting a string to w-shingles. It's nothing fancy, but it was fun
to write some Python after a long hiatus from the language. You can
check it out on [Github](https://github.com/taravancil/w-shingle) if
you're so inclined. RC friends: ping me if you know Python and want to
help me make this better! I'd love to pair with you.

Tomorrow I'm looking forward to the first "regular day" of RC, during
which I plan to write some scripts to help automate publishing new
posts to this blog, and to add some new features to the password
manager I wrote in Rust several weeks ago. What's most exciting about
that is that there are people at RC who also write Rust and might be
willing to help me when the compiler makes me want to cry, throw in
the towel and never think about Rust again. I mean, speaking
metaphorically of course. I swear that's never happened to me...
