---
title: The cost of clipping coupons
date: 2015-03-02
tags: [poverty]
categories: [personal]
---

I used to clip coupons.

I learned how to pinch pennies from the best. My dad was a frivolous man, and my
great grandmother even more so. At Christmas, we unwrapped gifts with a careful
touch and refolded the wrapping paper to be used again the following year. She
really didn't need to reserve such fiscal caution, and everyone in the family
always shared knowing glances as we carefully removed the bow decorating our
gift (an odd touch for for a gift from someone so frugal), wondering if we might
see it repurposed as an adornment for next year's birthday gift.

Thankfully, I don't clip coupons anymore.

But when I rifled through the admailer the other day, I sighed a complaint of
distress and annoyance. Just looking at the page was exhausting: the colors were
too bright and the copy was corny, deceptive, and excessive. There's no way to
search for a coupon for a specific product, or subset of products you might be
interested in. I can only imagine the exhaustion coupon clippers feel after
hunting down the coupons they need.

I then realized that the discount one receives, is only rewarded after paying a
hefty fee: spending one's time exposed to an invasive and intellectually void
form of media, desperately trying to claim the reader's attention. It is the
purest form of noise in the signal:noise ratio.

So of course paper ads are noisy. Aside from the assumption that the target
audience is in an income bracket low enough for the value of time spent clipping
coupons to be lower than the value of utilizing said coupons, marketers know
nothing about their readers, so it's in their interest to cast a wide net, in
the hopes of catching as many couponers as possible, all the while slowing down
those who sift through the muddy waters in order to find the savings they need
to get by another day.

Just another example of how being poor is expensive.
