---
title: Voice
date: 2013-05-25
tags: [monsanto, mcnair, protesting]
categories: [personal]
---

During an afternoon bike ride through downtown Mt. Pleasant, I found myself
dodging dozens of people shouting protests against Monsanto, an agricultural
company infamous for its purportedly shady business practices and use of genetic
engineering. Observing this March Against Monsanto from a distance, repeated
chants of "Hell no! GMOs!" served as the cadence of my whirring mind as I
considered joining their protests.

Ultimately, I chose not to participate. Frankly, I'm just not comfortable with
the voice of a group of protesters representing my own. Sure, I probably share
the group's sentiments about how loathsome some of Monsanto's business practices
are, but I refuse to decry GMOs. Admittedly, I chuckled at the sight of a picket
sign that read "GMOs, WTF are those?" because I wondered how many people in the
march really didn't know WTF GMOs are, yet proudly wielded a sign that slanders
them.

A brief bit on why I'm not riding the non-GMO bandwagon... The popular media and
health movements have labeled GMOs (tee hee) as an over extension of
technological intervention and a major threat to consumers' health. GMO is an
umbrella term and there's an important distinction to make between genetically
modified organisms and genetically modified foods. A genetically modified
organism (GMO) is any living being whose genetic code has been modified via
genetic engineering. This includes bioluminescent goldfish, tomatoes that can
survive unpredictable spring frosts, and microbes that are designed to break
down plant products to create biofuels. The term GMO is far more encompassing
and less frightening than the "Frankenfood" image portrayed by GMO adversaries.

Over 2 million people across the globe raised their voices and marched against
Monsanto today. I'm glad to witness people displaying their dedication to
ethical, healthy, and sustainable foods. While I admire the protesters'
impassioned display of unrest, I think my voice best serves its purpose outside
of the picket lines.

I'll preface the following by nothing that whether you think these sorts of
tests are bunk or not, I think they're fun. Anyway according to the Workuno
strength-finding test, my top two strengths are "intellection" and "learning".
My interpretation of these results are that I'm inclined to spend my time
thinking, searching for information, and questioning. My internal voice is at a
constant hum, begging me to dig deeper in order to understand the whys and hows
of my surroundings. Thus, I spend a great deal of time exploring, reading, and
asking questions, rather than promoting my thoughts and opinions.

My voice isn't the loudest, but it's audible when necessary. My voice is
sheepish, but it's embedded with careful thought. My voice doesn't lead the
protest, but it asks a fellow onlooker, "What do you think about Monsanto and
GMOs?"

I feel that side conversations that question both the convictions of the
protesters and the protested carry as much value in inspiring progress as the
statements broadcast by protesters. Protests are meant to incite change, right?
Well, can you imagine how disastrous change could be without thoughtful and
critical conversation about the issue of protest?

Whether your voice is that of a fierce leader, gentle motivator, sharp critic,
or quiet thinker, it has a purpose. Find that purpose, use your voice, and raise
hell! (or questions that are relevant to the hell-raising)
